---
# Page settings
layout: default
keywords:
comments: false

# Hero section
title: Section 1
description: The goal of this section is to (i) let you chat with other students about projects, (ii) introduce some recent applications of deep learning, (iii) give you an idea of what makes a successful CS230 project.

# Micro navigation
micro_nav: true

---

# Welcome to CS230!

Talk about topics that students usually have questions about.
 * Groups of 1-3 students (4 ok if lot of work to do)
 * Main dates (01/15 form groups, 01/22 proposal, 02/19 milestone, 03/19 final report and poster)
 * Can combine project with other classes (need to write down in submissions + tailor it to the class + submit project for the other class)
 * Project office hours (15 mins per group per week with mandatory meetings for the first one, the week after proposal, the week after milestone)
 * Regular office hours (questions on the content of the class or assignments)

Now lets get a taste of what you will learn in CS230 and seem some cool demos of cutting edge deep learning.


# Applications of Deep Learning

A project in Deep learning can generally be classified by the type of data its working with.  Here are some interesting applications of deep learning.

## Computer Vision 


#### Image Classification 


{% include image.html description="" link="http://karpathy.github.io/2014/09/02/what-i-learned-from-competing-against-a-convnet-on-imagenet/" image="section/1/imagenet.jpg" %}



#### Object Detection

#### Image Segmentation


## Sequence Models

#### Speech Recognition
#### Time Series


## Miscellaneous
#### Generative Adversarial Networks
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XOxxPcy5Gr4
#### Autoencoders
#### Deep Reinforcement Learning



# Final Project

CS230 is unique in how much time we spend on the final project.

## What types of projects?

Historically, students who have succeeded in their CS230 projects have done one of the following:

 * **Used popular network architectures to perform a novel task.** For example, some students have used the YOLO algorithm to detect humans on images taken from their drones. They then cropped the humans out of the pictures and filled-in the humans position with the correct background using a Generative Adversarial Network. Another example: students have fine-tuned existing networks to perform state of the art accuracy in Tree Species Identification.
 * **Came up with a custom architecture to perform an existing (or novel task).** For example, students made changes to the popular U-net algorithm to improve performance on a chosen task such as brain tumor segmentation. Another example: students have improved accuracy on a task by adding and training an attention mechanism on top of the existing RNN architecture.
 * **Re-implemented a famous research paper.** For example, students have tried to re-implement the popular WaveNet algorithm with their own code.
 * **Did a research project.** For example, students have designed a neural network algorithm to debias word vectors using a novel technique. They then submitted their paper to a conference.

 Note that the common denominator of these projects is that students have contributed something *novel*. Of course, the above categories are not the only ones. We encourage students to talk with their mentors to figure out if their project idea is aligned with CS230’s expectations.

## How to get started!
 * Look at [past projects](/past-projects) in CS230. 
 * 
 * Check out these great GitHub repositories: 
[Awesome NLP](https://github.com/keon/awesome-nlp),
[Awesome GAN](https://github.com/nightrome/really-awesome-gan), 
[Awesome DL](https://github.com/endymecy/awesome-deeplearning-resources/blob/master/papers/2018/dl.md). 

