---
# Page settings
layout: default
keywords:
comments: false

# Hero section
title: Section 3
description: Understanding gradient descent and backpropagation. We will go through four different neural network examples and explicitly compute the backpropagation equations.

# Micro navigation
micro_nav: true

---

# Introduction

When datasets are large and high-dimensional, it is computationally very expensive (sometimes impossible) to find an analytical solution for the optimal parameters of your network. Instead, we use optimization methods. A vanilla optimization approach would be to sample different combinations of parameters and choose the one with the lowest loss value. 
 - **Is this a good idea?**
 - **Would it be possible to extract another piece of information to direct our search towards the optimal parameters?**

{% include image.html description="The trajectory through a loss landscape for a linear regression model trained with gradient descent. The red dot indicates the value of the loss function corresponding to the initial parameter values." link="https://rawgit.com/danielkunin/Deeplearning-Visualizations/master/optimization/index.html" image="section/3/optimization.png" caption="true"%}


This is exactly what *gradient descent* does!  Apart from the loss value, gradient descent computes the local gradient of the loss when evaluating potential parameters. This information is used to decide in what direction the search should go to find better parameter values. This extra piece of information (the local gradient) can be computed relatively easily using *backpropagation*. This recursive algorithm breaks up complex derivatives into smaller parts through the *chain rule*.


# Univariate regression
Let’s consider a linear regression. You have a data set (x,y) with m examples. In other words, x = (x1, …, xm) and y = (y1, …, ym) are row vectors of m scalar examples . The goal is to find the scalar parameters w and b such that the line y = wx + b optimally fits the data! This can be achieved using Gradient Descent.

{% include image.html description="Univariate regression." link="" image="section/3/1/model.png" caption="false" %}

To help understand the problem lets [visualize](https://rawgit.com/danielkunin/Deeplearning-Visualizations/master/optimization/index.html) the setup.  

### Forward Propagation
The first step of gradient descent is to compute the loss. To do this, define your model’s output and loss function. In this regression setting, you can use the mean square error loss.
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/1/forward.png" caption="false" %}

### Backward Propagation
The next step is to compute the local gradient of the loss with respect to the parameters (i.e. w and b). This means you need to calculate derivatives. Note that values stored during the forward propagation are used in the gradient equations.
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/1/backprop.png" caption="false" %}



# Multivariate regression

Now consider the case where X is a matrix of shape (n,m) and y is still a row vector of shape (1,m). Instead of a single scalar value, the weights will now be a vector (one element per feature) of shape (1,n). **What is the shape of the bias parameter?**
{% include image.html description="Multivariate regression." link="" image="section/3/2/model.png" caption="false"%}

### Forward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/2/forward.png" caption="false"%}

### Backward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/2/backprop.png" caption="false"%}



# Two layer linear network
Consider stacking two linear layers together. You can introduce a hidden variable Z1 of shape (n1, m), which is the output of the first linear layer. The first layer is parameterized by a weight matrix W1 of shape (n1,nX) and bias b1 of shape (n1, 1) broadcasted in (n1, m). The second layer will be the same as in the multivariate regression case, but its input will be Z1 instead of X.
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/3/model.png" caption="false"%}

### Forward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/3/forward.png" caption="false"%}

### Backward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/3/backprop.png" caption="false"%}



# Two layer non-linear network
In this example, before sending Z1 as the input to the second layer, you will pass it through the sigmoid function. The output is denoted A1 and is the input of the second layer.
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/4/model.png" caption="false"%}

### Forward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/4/forward.png" caption="false"%}

### Backward Propagation
{% include image.html description="" link="" image="section/3/4/backprop.png" caption="false"%}


# Helpful resources
  
 * [Matrix derivatives "cheat" sheet](http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/teaching/courses/sntn/sntn-2017/resources/Matrix_derivatives_cribsheet.pdf)
 * [CS229 Lecture Notes](http://cs229.stanford.edu/notes/cs229-notes-deep_learning.pdf)
 * [CS229 Backpropagation](http://cs229.stanford.edu/notes/cs229-notes-backprop.pdf)




